% NFS484/1484 Midterm
% Exam Date:
% Nov. 7, 2013

<!-- pandoc midterm-V03.md -o midterm.pdf -V fontsize=12pt -V geometry:margin=1in-->
<!-- pandoc midterm-V03.md -o midterm.docx -->

**General Instructions**

1. This is an open book examination; therefore students may use any
   aids that have been brought into the examination room.
   
2. The examination is divided into 2 parts (2 studies) worth 15 marks
   and 25 marks respectively, for a total of 40 marks.  The midterm
   examination will comprise 30% of your final grade.

3. Students must answer all questions in all parts of the examination.
   Please be certain to allocate your time appropriately to ensure
   that you are able to complete all parts of the examination.

4. All answers should be clearly provided in the answer booklets
   provided.  Please provide your answer on the right-hand side of the
   page only.  It will be assumed that the left-hand side of the page
   is used for note making purposes only and material appearing on
   this side of the page will not be read or graded.

\newpage\newpage

**Background**

Dietary fatty acid (FA) intake influences risk for type 2 diabetes
(T2DM), with saturated fatty acid (SFA) and n-3 FA intake associated
with an increased and decreased risk, respectively.  Transition into
T2DM occurs when the pancreatic, insulin secreting beta-cells fail to
adequately respond to elevated blood glucose levels to compensate for
the reduced insulin sensitivity.  SFA may mediate their influence on
T2DM risk through impairing beta-cell function (possibly via increased
fat deposition in the beta-cells, leading to impaired cytosolic
activity and functioning), while a variety of different mechanisms
have been explored to uncover protective effects of the n-3 FA.
Likely candidates for SFA and n-3 FA are palmitic acid (PA) and
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), respectively.

There are a number of pathways that could be influenced by dietary FA.
Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) occurs when glucose enters
the pancreatic beta-cell, goes through the glycolytic pathway, and
enters the Kreb Cycle to produce ATP.  The accumulation of
intracellular ATP results in depolarization of the cell membrane and
ultimately releasing insulin into the circulation.

**Study 1 (Value 15/40 marks)**

A randomized controlled trial was conducted to determine the influence
of EPA on glucose control. Forty participants at-risk for T2DM were
put into a control and an experimental group.  Both groups were
instructed to replace their dietary fats they typically use with
either butter (45% SFA, does not contain EPA) or margarine containing
EPA, both of which were provided by the researchers, while maintaining
their usual diet for 3 months.  Fasting plasma glucose (FPG),
hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c; a measure of long term blood glucose), and
C-peptide (C-pep; a protein co-released with insulin and used as a
measure of total insulin secretion) were measured in a fasted state in
the morning at baseline and after the three month treatment (Table 1).
Subjects were given a glucose load and blood was drawn over a 2 hour
period to monitor glucose and insulin levels.  These data were used to
determine the insulin sensitivity index (ISI; a measure of peripheral
(muscle) insulin sensitivity, with higher values indicating better
insulin sensitivity), and glucose and insulin area-under-the-curve
(gAUC and iAUC, respectively) (Table 2).  There were no significant
changes in body weight between groups.

**Questions:**

1. Describe the results from Table 1. (2/40 marks)
	* Control: FPG, HbA1c, C-pep before=after
	* EPA: FPG, HbA1c before > after; C-pep before < after (or before=after)
	* Marks off if between group comparison was made (there was no
       tests for between group), if no direction was indicated, if
       non-significant findings were not mentioned, or if other
       variables were not mentioned


2. Based on the data in Table 1, taken under fasting conditions,
   discuss a potential mechanism whereby EPA may decrease the risk of
   T2DM. (4/40 marks)
	   * Many possible answers, but marks were given at most to some
          mention of T2DM risk, relating to glucose control, arguing
          that insulin secretion was involved (or not involved) using
          C-pep, and potentially arguing that there was a problem with
          the pancreas (or with IR)
	   * Potential answers include:
		   * EPA decreases FPG and HbA1c, increases (or no change)
			 C-peptide (Table 1).
		   * The data suggests that EPA increases (or doesn't) the
			 ability of the pancreas to release insulin (C-pep) and
			 control fasting blood glucose (FPG), inducing long term
			 improvements in glycemic control (HbA1c).
		   * Better blood glucose control = lower risk for T2DM.
		   * Or: May be insulin resistance because of no C-pep change,
			 may be affecting GLUT4 translocation or insulin receptor
		   * Or: Competes with SFA to inhibit the effect of increased
			 fat deposition in the cytosol (Background)
		   * Or: EPA increases membrane fluidity in the beta-cell for
			 better entry of glucose (or in the muscle cells)


3. Describe the results in Table 2. (2/40 marks)
	* Control: gAUC, iAUC, ISI before = after
	* EPA: ISI before = after, gAUC before > after, iAUC before <
	  after
	* Marks off as described in Q1.


4. What was the value of adding a glucose load, compared to just using
   fasting measures, to this experiment?  What additional information
   does the glucose/insulin response to the glucose load provide, in
   terms of mechanisms, as it relates to the impact of EPA on T2DM
   risk? (7/40 marks)
	   * Marks were given for comparing fed vs fasted conditions
		 (glucose load vs fasting), stating that peripheral insulin
		 sensitivity was **not** involved and that EPA has a role in
		 insulin secretion, and lastly relating that to T2DM risk
	   * Potential answer:
		 * Glucose load provides information on insulin sensitivity
		 (i.e. muscle) and on GSIS (pancreas), while fasting does not
		 * Given increased iAUC, lower gAUC, and no change in ISI
		   (Table 2), EPA influences GSIS (potentially via lower
		   cytosolic fat deposition, problems with glucose entry into
		   glyocolysis, or with ATP buildup (Background)) but does not
		   influence insulin sensitivity


![Table 1: Randomized controlled trial of EPA and control groups.  Columns represent values at baseline and after intervention.  FPG = fasting plasma glucose, HbA1c = hemoglobin A1c, C-pep = C-peptide.   P1 reflects comparisons within the control group and P2 reflects comparisons within the EPA group.  Significance is denoted at P<0.05.](images/table1.png)

![Table 2: Randomized controlled trial of EPA and control liquid meals.  Columns represent values at baseline and after intervention.  ISI = Muscle insulin sensitivity index, gAUC and iAUC = glucose and insulin area-under-the-curve.  P1 reflects comparisons within the control group and P2 reflects comparisons within the EPA group.  Significance is denoted at P<0.05.](images/table2.png)

\newpage\newpage

**Study 2 (Value 25/40 marks)**

SFA are proposed to have a lipotoxic effect (which is impairment to
cytosolic metabolism caused by an accumulation of intracellular FA) on
pancreatic islets, however, it is unknown how this occurs.  An
experimental study using rats was conducted to determine the effect of
PA or EPA on the pancreas and mechanisms underlying glucose-stimulate
insulin secretion (GSIS).  Rats were fed standard chow (control;
without PA or EPA), PA, EPA, or PA with EPA (PA-EPA) diets for 3
weeks, after which they were sacrificed to obtain the pancreas.
Pancreatic islets were then measured for level of insulin production,
triglyceride (TG) content, SREBP-1c (transcription factor which
initiates lipogenesis), and UCP-2 (uncoupling protein-2; disrupts ATP
production in the mitochondria).

**Questions:**

5. Describe the results presented in Figure 1. (2/40 marks)
	* Insulin secretion: Control = EPA = PA-EPA > PA
	* Marks off as per Q1.

6. Describe the results shown in Figure 2. (3/40 marks)
	* TG, SREBP1c, UCP-2: Control = EPA = PA-EPA < PA
	* Marks off as per Q1.


7. Using information from the background and Study 2, propose
   mechanism(s) on how PA and EPA may contribute to the regulation of
   insulin secretion within the mitochondria and the cytosol. (6/40 marks)
	   * Marks were given based on clear separation of mitochondria
		 and cytosol, which were linked to UCP and SREBP/TG, how these
		 individual molecules contributed to GSIS, using the
		 information in the background, and that the PA-EPA finding
		 was discussed, stating that EPA alone does **not** contribute
		 to GSIS, but inhibits/competes with PA (which does affect
		 GSIS)
	   * Potential answer:
		 * PA increased TG, SREBP, UCP, decreased insulin secretion
		   (Figures 1 and 2).  Addition of EPA attentuated the levels
		   to normal, but EPA alone had no effect
		 * PA increased lipogenesis, which increased TG content, which
		   affects cytosolic metabolism (Background), potentially
		   impair glucose entry into the beta cell or its passage
		   through glycolysis to create ATP (Background), which would
		   reduce GSIS and increase the risk for T2DM
		 * PA increased UCP, which disrupts production of ATP and
		   preventing the accumulation of ATP, which is needed for the
		   depolarization of the beta cell membrane in order to
		   release insulin (Background), therefore reducing GSIS and
		   increasing the risk for T2DM
	     * EPA alone has no influence on GSIS, but inhibits the action
		   of PA


8. Given the data in Study 2, give 3 examples of additional
   factors/measures the investigators could have considered in study 1
   to get a better understanding of the role of n-3 FA in T2DM
   risk.  Provide a one or two sentence justification of these
   factors/measures.  (6/40 marks)
	   * Could have many different types of answers.
	   * Marks were taken off if more than 3 examples were given, if
		 the measure or the location of the measure was ambigious, if
		 the measure was entirely unrealistic in humans, if there was
		 more than 2 sentences, and if the exact same measures as in
		 Study 2 were suggested (we aren't looking for regurgitation)


9. Think back to the course assignment regarding the Sandy Lake
   population, where some individuals had a single nucleotide
   polymorphism (SNP) at amino acid 319 (GS) in the *HNF1A* gene
   which caused a decrease in pancreatic insulin production.  Given
   the increasing consumption of Western style foods that are high in
   SFA in Sandy Lake, discuss 1) how the increase in SFA intake could
   contribute to T2DM risk and 2) whether the return to a traditional
   diet, including increased consumption of fatty fish (which are high
   in EPA), would impact the risk for T2DM.  Be certain to compare and
   contrast the impact of dietary fat in both the GG (wild type) and
   SS (homozygote for the SNP) groups (you do not need to consider the
   GS heterzygote group in your answer).  Defend your answer by
   drawing on data provided in this exam. (8/40 marks)
	   * Marks were given for distinguishing between insulin
		 production (genotype) and insulin secretion (diet/FA type),
		 contrasting the different impacts of the SFA vs EPA on the
		 two genotypes (GG vs SS), distinguishing between the fact
		 that EPA alone does not contribute to reducing risk for T2DM,
		 but that it inhibits effect of SFA, and any additional pieces
		 that may have come from the assignment or from general
		 knowledge
	   * Potential (brief) answer:
		 * SS have reduced insulin production compared to GG and
		   higher risk for T2DM (regardless of environment), and in
		   fact all SS individuals got diabetes (Assignment)
	     * SFA reduce insulin secretion (Study 1 and 2) and thus an
		   increased risk of T2DM
	     * Dietary SFA would increase risk of T2DM in both GG and SS,
		   but more so in the SS group because of defect in insulin
		   production AND reduced insulin secretion because of SFA
	     * Returning to a traditional diet (with EPA) would reduce the
		   risk of developing T2DM in GG and potentially in SS.
		   However, traditional diet would probably only delay the
		   development of T2DM in SS individuals as they still have
		   defect in insulin production.
	     * EPA alone does not improve GSIS, however, it
		   competes/inhibits the effect of SFA and will reduce the
		   risk for T2DM.

![Figure 1: Insulin secretion in control, PA, EPA, and PA with EPA (PA-EPA) feeding groups.  Groups that share a superscript are not significantly different from each other at p<0.05.](images/figure1.png)

![Figure 2: Pancreatic islet triglyceride (TG) content and mRNA levels of SREBP-1 (lipogenic enzyme transcription factor) and UCP-2 (uncoupling protein) in control, PA, EPA, and PA-EPA feeding groups.  Groups that share a superscript are not significantly different from each other at p<0.05.](images/figure2.png)
