% NFS484/1484 Midterm
% Exam Date:
% Nov. 7, 2013

<!-- pandoc midterm-V03.md -o midterm.pdf -V fontsize=12pt -V geometry:margin=1in-->
<!-- pandoc midterm-V03.md -o midterm.docx -->

**General Instructions**

1. This is an open book examination; therefore students may use any
   aids that have been brought into the examination room.  However,
   electronic devices may only be used to scroll through class notes.
   Texting and internet access is not permitted.

2. The examination is divided into 2 parts (2 studies) worth 18 marks
   and 32 marks respectively, for a total of 50 marks.  The midterm
   examination will comprise 25% of your final grade.

3. Students must answer all questions in all parts of the examination.
   Please be certain to allocate your time appropriately to ensure
   that you are able to complete all parts of the examination.

4. All answers should be clearly provided in the answer booklets
   provided.  Please provide your answer on the right-hand side of the
   page only.  It will be assumed that the left-hand side of the page
   is used for note making purposes only and material appearing on
   this side of the page will not be read or graded.

\newpage\newpage

**Background**

Dietary fatty acid (FA) intake influences risk for diabetes, with
saturated fatty acid (SFA) and omega-3 fatty acid intake associated
with an increased and decreased risk, respectively.  Transition into
diabetes occurs when the pancreatic, insulin secreting beta-cells fail
to adequately respond to elevated blood glucose in the face of reduced
insulin sensitivity.  Saturated fatty acids may mediate their
influence on diabetes risk through impairing beta-cell function
(possibly via increased fat deposition in the cells, impairing
cellular activity), while polyunsaturated fatty acids likely protect
against this impairment.  Likely candidates for SFA and PUFA are
palmitic acid (PA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), respectively.

There are a number of pathways that could be influenced by dietary
FA.  Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) occurs when glucose
enters the pancreatic beta-cell, goes through the glycolytic pathway,
and enters the Kreb Cycle to produce ATP.  The accumulation of
intracellular ATP closes beta-cell K+ channels and depolarizing the
cell membrane.  Depolarization opens Ca++ ion channels and increases
intracellular Ca++, causing storage vesicles containing insulin to
merge with the cell membrane and release insulin into circulation.

**Study 1**

To determine the effect of the long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids
(EPA and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)) on diabetes management, a
randomized controlled trial was conducted to determine the influence
of EPA and DHA on glucose control. Forty participants at-risk for
diabetes were put into a control and an experimental group.  Both
groups were instructed to replace their breakfast meal with a
prescribed liquid diet (set per kg of weight for each participant)
while maintaining their typical daily diets for 3 months.  The control
and experimental liquid meals were isocaloric and had the same
macronutrient composition, except the experimental meal contained EPA
and DHA, while the control meal was devoid of these two fatty acids.
Fasting glucose (FPG), hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c; a measure of long term
blood glucose), and C-peptide (C-pep; a protein co-released with
insulin and used as a measure of total insulin secretion) were
measured in a fasted state in the morning at baseline and after the
three month treatment (Table 1).  Subjects were given a 75g oral
glucose tolerance load and blood was drawn over a 2 hour period to
determine glucose and insulin.  These data were used to determine the
insulin sensitivity index (ISI; a measure of peripheral (muscle)
insulin sensitivity, with higher values indicating better insulin
sensitivity), and glucose and insulin area-under-the-curve (gAUC and
iAUC, respectively) (Table 2).  There were no significant changes in
body weight between groups.

**Questions:**

1. Describe the results from Table 1.
	* FPG and HbA1c were significantly decreased, and C-pep was
	  significantly increased, following the n-3 FA treatment.
	* There was no significant differences seen in following the
	  control diet.
	  
2. Based on the data in Table 1, taken under fasting conditions,
   discuss a potential mechanism whereby omega-3 fatty acids may decrease
   the risk of T2DM.
	   * n-3 FA intake is associated with a decrease in FPG, a
		 decrease in HbA1c (a long term indicator of the level of
		 blood glucose), and an increase in C-peptide (which is an
		 indication of insulin secretion as it is co-secreted) (Table
		 1).
	   * The data suggests that n-3 FA increase the ability of the
		 pancreas to control blood glucose, likely inducing long term
		 improvements in the pancreatic beta-cells as seen in the
		 reduced HbA1c.
	   * Because of the better blood glucose control, the risk for
		 T2DM may decrease.

3. Describe the results in Table 2.
	* gAUC was significantly decreased and iAUC was significantly
	  increased following the n-3 FA treatment, while there was no
	  significant differences in ISI following the treatment.
	* There were no significant differences in the control condition.

4. What was the value of adding a glucose load, compared to just using
   fasting measures, to this experiment and what additional
   information does it provide, in terms of mechanisms, as it relates
   to the impact of the long chain omega-3 fatty acids on diabetes
   risk?
	   * It provides information such as quantity of insulin secreted
		 (iAUC) following an elevation in blood glucose and provides
		 information on insulin sensitivity, to determine how n-3 FA
		 influence insulin sensitivity.
	   * Adding a glucose load allows the investigation into how n-3
		 FA affect GSIS and whole-body insulin sensitivity
		 post-prandially, as both of these are important factors in
		 the development of T2DM (Background).
	   * Based on the data from Table 2, n-3 FA do not significantly
		 influence insulin sensitivity, but do increase insulin
		 secretion.  As such, n-3 FA seem to influence GSIS/pancreatic
		 insulin release.
 
![Randomized controlled trial of omega-3 (n-3) FA and control liquid meals.  Columns represent values at baseline and after intervention.  FPG = fasting plasma glucose, HbA1c = hemoglobin A1c (a measure of long term blood glucose levels), and C-pep = C-peptide (protein released with insulin).  P1 and P2 are theprobabilities calculated between before and after treatment for control and omega-3 group, respectively. ](images/table2.png)

![Randomized controlled trial of omega-3 (n-3) FA and control liquid meals.  Columns represent values at baseline and after intervention.  ISI = Muscle insulin sensitivity index (a higher number is better), gAUC and iAUC = glucose and insulin area-under-the-curve.  P1 and P2 are theprobabilities calculated between before and after treatment for control and omega-3 group, respectively. ](images/table2.png)

\newpage\newpage

**Study 2**

SFA have been proposed to have a lipotoxic effect on pancreatic
islets, however, it is unkown how this occurs.  An experimental study
using rats was conducted to determine the effect of PA or EPA on the
pancreas and mechanisms underlying GSIS.  Rats were fed either
control, PA, EPA, or EPA-PA diets for 3 weeks, after which they were
sacrificed to obtain the pancreas.  Pancreatic islets were then
measured for level of insulin production, triglyceride (TG) content,
SREBP-1c (transcription factor which initiates lipogenesis), and UCP-2
(uncoupling protein-2; distrupts ATP production in the mitochondria).

![Insulin secretion in control, PA, EPA, and PA-EPA feeding groups.  Groups that share a superscript are not significantly different from each other at p<0.05.](images/figure1.png)

![Pancreatic islet triglyceride (TG) content and mRNA levels of SREBP-1 (lipogenic enzyme transcription factor) and UCP-2 (uncoupling protein) in control, PA, EPA, and PA-EPA feeding groups.  Groups that share a superscript are not significantly different from each other at p<0.05.](images/figure2.png)

**Questions:**

5. Describe the results presented in Figure 1.
	* There was a significant decrease in insulin secretion in the PA
	  group compared to all other groups.
	* No other significant differences were seen in the other groups.

6. Describe the results shown in Figure 2.
	* There was a significant increase in pancreatic TG content,
	  SREBP-1c, and UCP-2 in the PA condition, compared to the other
	  conditions.  The other groups were not significantly different
	  from each other.

7. Using information from the background and Study 2, propose
   mechanism(s) on how PA and EPA may contribute to the mitochrondrial
   and cytolic regulation of insulin secretion.
	   * PA significantly increased TG content, SREBP-1c, and UCP-2
		 (Figure 2) and significantly decreased insulin secretion
		 (Figure 1).
	   * Since SREBP-1c increases lipogenesis (Study 2 Background),
		 this explains the increase in TG content within the
		 beta-cell.  PA seems to influence this transcription factor
		 to increase, thus increasing TG production, leading to an
		 accumulation of cellular TG that will impair cellular
		 activity (Background).  Impaired beta-cell cytosolic activity
		 may reduce insulin release.
	   * Since UCP-2 distrupts ATP production in the mitochondria
		 (Study 2 Background), and since ATP is involved in initiating
		 insulin release from the storage vesicles via the Ca++
		 channels (Background), this suggests that PA impairs GSIS via
		 increased UCP-2 that leads to a reduced ability of the
		 storage vesicles to release insulin into circulation.
	   * While EPA itself does not affect UCP-2 or SREBP-1c, it
		 inhibits PA effect.

7. Given the data in Study 2, what could the investigators have
   measured in study 1 to get a better understanding of the role of
   omega-3 fatty acids in diabetes risk.
	   * Could have been a number of things.
	   * Could have been they should have measured PA in the blood or
		 in the diet.
	   * Or had another treatment group with equal parts EPA and PA.
	   * Could have measured EPA within the blood to get a better
		 understanding between EPA intake, EPA in serum, and
		 pancreatic islet function.  Though this may not be
		 appropriate given the potential harm PA does to the pancreas.
	   * Could have measured markers of lipogenesis.

8. Think back to the previous assignment regarding the Sandy Lake
   population, where some individuals had a SNP in the *HNF1A* gene
   which caused a decrease in pancreatic insulin production.  Given
   the increasing consumption of Western style foods that are high in
   SFA in Sandy Lake, discuss the potential influence on the risk for
   diabetes that an increased consumption of fatty fish (which are
   high in EPA) may have on an individual in the Sandy Lake community
   with the *HNF1A* gene SNP. 
	   * Potential answer: Because the SNP on the *HNF1A* gene affects
		 insulin production, and because a high SFA (i.e. PA) diet
		 reduces the ability of insulin storage vesicles to release
		 the insulin that has been produced, the First Nations
		 individuals may be at much greater risk for developing
		 diabetes/hyperglycemia if they consume a high SFA diet
		 (reduce insulin release) and have the SNP (reduced insulin
		 production).
	   * However, if an individual did have the SNP, consuming a diet
		 high in EPA may increase the amount of released insulin that
		 has been produced.  This may potentially offset the harm of
		 the SNP by reducing the risk for diabetes.
	   * But, an individual who consumes EPA and doesn't have the SNP
		 is the least likely to develop diabetes because both insulin
		 production and insulin release are functioning optimally.
