% NFS484/1484 Midterm
% Exam Date:
% Nov. 7, 2013

<!-- pandoc midterm-V02.md -o midterm.pdf -V fontsize=12pt -V geometry:margin=1in-->
## Background

Dietary fatty acid intake is associated with the risk for
diabetes. Transition into diabetes occurs when the pancreatic, insulin
secreting beta-cells fail to adequately respond to elevated blood
glucose. Saturated fatty acids may mediate their influence on diabetes
risk through impairing beta-cell function (possibly via increased fat
deposition in the cells), while polyunsaturated fatty acids likely are
protective against impairment via their anti-inflammatory properties.
Systemic inflammation may also play a role in the development of
diabetes through increased apoptosis and immune cell activation.
Likely candidates for SFA and PUFA are palmitic acid (PA) and
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), respectively.

## Study 1

SFA have been proposed to have a lipotoxic effect on pancreatic
islets, however, it is unkown how occurs.  Insulin release has also
been suggested to be stimulated by ATP levels.  Rats were sacrificed
in order to obtain the pancreas.  Pancreatic islets were then
incubated in saline (control), PA, EPA, or PA-EPA solutions.  Insulin
secretion, triglyceride (TG) content, SREBP-1c (a lipogenic enzyme
transcription factor), and UCP-2 (uncoupling protein-2) were then
measured. (NOTE: Do the students know about UCP and what it does?)

![Insulin secretion in control, PA, EPA, and PA-EPA feeding groups.  * = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01.](images/figure1.png)

![Pancreatic islet triglyceride (TG) levels in control, PA, EPA, and PA-EPA feeding groups.  ** = p<0.01.](images/figure2.png)

![Pancreatic levels of mRNA for SREBP-1c (lipogenic enzyme transcription factor) and UCP-2 (uncoupling protein 2) in control, PA, and PA-EPA feeding groups.  * = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01.](images/figure3.png)

### Potential questions:

Drawing on your own knowledge of biology, how might TG within the cell
influence insulin secretion?

Based on the information presented thus far, propose a potential
mechanism for the effect of PA on pancreatic islets and how EPA might
influence this effect.

\newpage\newpage

## Study 2

To determine the effect of the long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids
(EPA and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)) on diabetes management, a
randomized control trial was conducted to determine the influence of
EPA and DHA on glucose control and inflammation. Forty participants
with diabetes were put into a control and an experimental group.  Both
groups were instructed to replace their breakfast meal with a
prescribed liquid diet (set per kg of weight for each participant)
while maintaining their typical daily diets for 3 months.  The control
and experimental liquid meals were isocaloric and had the same
macronutrient composition, but the experimental meal contained EPA and
DHA (See Table 1).  Glucose, hemoglobin A1c (a measure of long term
blood glucose), BMI, serum triglycerides, and C-peptide (a protein
released with insulin; is a measure of insulin secretion) were
measured in a fasted state in the morning on each participant at
baseline and after treatment.


![Calorie composition of experimental liquid meal (DIMS) and control liquid meal (CZ1.5).  Liquid meals replaced a solid meal, so that calorie intake was maintained from baseline.](images/table1.png)

![Randomized clinical trial of experimental and control liquid meals.  Columns represent change in values from baseline.  FPG = fasting plasma glucose, HbA1c = hemoglobin A1c (a measure of long term blood glucose levels), and C-pep = C-peptide (protein released with insulin).](images/table2.png)

### Potential question:

What could the investigators measured to get a better idea of what is
going on in this study? (they didn't measure level of PA in the blood
or in the diet, as PA and EPA may be imbalanced)

What could be changed about the study design to get a better idea of
what is going on.  Discuss any potential ethical issues that may come
up. (the researchers could have had a group take PA supplements as
well as a n3 and PA supplement group. Unethical because of the risk
associated with PA intake)
