% NFS484/1484 Midterm
% Exam Date:
% Nov. 7, 2013

<!-- pandoc midterm-V03.md -o midterm.pdf -V fontsize=12pt -V geometry:margin=1in-->
<!-- pandoc midterm-V03.md -o midterm.docx -->

**General Instructions**

1. This is an open book examination; therefore students may use any
   aids that have been brought into the examination room.  However,
   electronic devices may only be used to scroll through class notes.
   Texting and internet access is not permitted.

2. The examination is divided into 2 parts (2 studies) worth 18 marks
   and 32 marks respectively, for a total of 50 marks.  The midterm
   examination will comprise 25% of your final grade.

3. Students must answer all questions in all parts of the examination.
   Please be certain to allocate your time appropriately to ensure
   that you are able to complete all parts of the examination.

4. All answers should be clearly provided in the answer booklets
   provided.  Please provide your answer on the right-hand side of the
   page only.  It will be assumed that the left-hand side of the page
   is used for note making purposes only and material appearing on
   this side of the page will not be read or graded.

**Background**

Dietary fatty acid (FA) intake influences risk for diabetes, with
saturated fatty acid (SFA) and omega-3 fatty acid intake associated
with an increased and decreased risk, respectively.  Transition into
diabetes occurs when the pancreatic, insulin secreting beta-cells fail
to adequately respond to elevated blood glucose.  Saturated fatty
acids may mediate their influence on diabetes risk through impairing
beta-cell function (possibly via increased fat deposition in the
cells), while polyunsaturated fatty acids likely protect against this
impairment.  Likely candidates for SFA and PUFA are palmitic acid (PA)
and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), respectively.

There are a number of pathways that could be influenced by dietary
FA.  Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) occurs when glucose
enters the pancreatic beta-cell, goes through the glycolytic pathway,
and enters the Kreb Cycle to produce ATP.  The accumulation of
intracellular ATP closes beta-cell K+ channels and depolarizing the
cell membrane.  Depolarization opens Ca++ ion channels and increases
intracellular Ca++, causing storage vesicles containing insulin to
merge with the cell membrane and release insulin into circulation.

**Study 1**

To determine the effect of the long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids
(EPA and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)) on diabetes management, a
randomized controlled trial was conducted to determine the influence
of EPA and DHA on glucose control. Forty participants at-risk for
diabetes were put into a control and an experimental group.  Both
groups were instructed to replace their breakfast meal with a
prescribed liquid diet (set per kg of weight for each participant)
while maintaining their typical daily diets for 3 months.  The control
and experimental liquid meals were isocaloric and had the same
macronutrient composition, except the experimental meal contained EPA
and DHA, while the control meal was devoid of these two fatty acids.
Fasting glucose (FPG), hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c; a measure of long term
blood glucose), and C-peptide (C-pep; a protein co-released with
insulin and used as a measure of total insulin secretion) were
measured in a fasted state in the morning at baseline and after the
three month treatment (Table 1).  Subjects were given a 75g oral
glucose tolerance test and blood was drawn over a 2 hour period to
determine glucose and insulin.  These data were used to determine the
insulin sensitivity index (ISI; a measure of peripheral (muscle)
insulin sensitivity, with higher values indicating better insulin
sensitivity), and glucose and insulin area-under-the-curve (gAUC and
iAUC, respectively) (Table 2).  There were no significant changes in
body weight between groups.

**Questions:**

1. Describe the results from Table 1.

2. Based on the data in Table 1, taken under fasting conditions,
   discuss a potential mechanism whereby omega-3 fatty acids may decrease
   the risk of T2DM.

![Randomized controlled trial of omega-3 FA and control liquid meals.  Columns represent values at baseline and after intervention.  FPG = fasting plasma glucose, HbA1c = hemoglobin A1c (a measure of long term blood glucose levels), C-pep = C-peptide (protein released with insulin), ISI = Muscle insulin sensitivity index (a higher number is better), gAUC and iAUC = glucose and insulin area-under-the-curve.](images/table2.png)

## Study 2

SFA have been proposed to have a lipotoxic effect on pancreatic
islets, however, it is unkown how this occurs.  An experimental study
using rats was conducted to determine the effect of PA or EPA on the
pancreas and mechanisms underlying GSIS.  Rats were fed either a
control, PA, EPA, or EPA-PA diets for 3 weeks, after which they were
sacrificed to obtain the pancreas.  Pancreatic islets were then
measured for level of insulin production, triglyceride (TG) content,
SREBP-1c (transcription factor which initiates lipogenesis), and UCP-2
(uncoupling protein-2, which decreases the oxidative phosphorylation
potential of glucose).

![Insulin secretion in control, PA, EPA, and PA-EPA feeding groups.  Groups that share a superscript are not significantly different from each other at p<0.05.](images/figure1.png)

![Pancreatic islet triglyceride (TG) content and mRNA levels of SREBP-1 (lipogenic enzyme transcription factor) and UCP-2 (uncoupling protein) in control, PA, EPA, and PA-EPA feeding groups.  Groups that share a superscript are not significantly different from each other at p<0.05.](images/figure2.png)

**Questions:**

3. Describe the results presented in Figure 1.

4. Describe the results shown in Figure 2.

5. Drawing on your own knowledge of biology and from the background
   information, how might TG within the cell influence insulin
   secretion? (need this question?)

6. Using information from the background and Study 2, propose a
   mechanism on how PA and EPA may contribute to the mitochrondrial
   and cytolic regulation of insulin secretion.

7. Given the data in Study 2, what could the investigators have
   measured in study 1 to get a better understanding of the role of
   omega-3 fatty acids in diabetes risk.

	<!--(they didn't measure level of PA in the blood or in the diet,
   as PA and EPA may be imbalanced)-->

8. Think back to the previous assignment regarding the Sandy Lake
   population, where some individuals had a gene which caused a
   decrease in insulin production.  Given the increasing consumption
   of Western style foods that are high in SFA in Sandy Lake, discuss
   the potential influence on the risk for diabetes that an increased
   consumption of fatty fish (which are high in EPA) may have on an
   individual in the Sandy Lake community with the *HNF1A* gene.
   What influence would a decrease intake of fatty acid have on an
   individual with *HNF1A*?
