# Ideas #

Maybe instead of African + SFA intake with CVD, we look at how the
role of SFA vs carbs on lipoprotein size and atherogenicity?

BUT: There is the *FADS* gene which about 80% of African Americans
carry two copies of the gene (associated with increased levels of
arachidonic acid) compared to about 45% in European Americans.

*FADS* gene and LDL

ALA -> d5d (FADS1) and d6d (FADS2) -> DHA
LA -> d5d and d6d -> AA


Greater d5d and d6d toward AA increase risk for CAD

Combination of **both** FADS gene + dietary intake is important

rs174548 in FADS1 may influence cholesterol metabolism

Individuals with CAD had lower levels of LA than controls.  So even
though it has a greater inflammatory properties, it is still
essential (for arterial stiffness).  Combined with higher d6d + d5d activity.

Combination of higher LA intake, lower ALA intake, and greater d6d
activity (eg. more risk alleles on the FADS gene cluster) is the worst
case.

Even though greater d9d and elongase contribute to more ARA *and*
EPA+DHA, there are vastly greater levels of both LA in the diet + more
ARA. So the protective effect of EPA+DHA is offset by the higher
levels of LA+ARA. (Martinelli)

Good figures/tables in Martinelli2008

Background:

Greater systemic inflammation can lead to greater oxidation of LDL
particles, and when these particles penetrate the blood vessel walls
can eventually cause a build-up of plaque.  The built up plaque can
eventually lead to a coronery event such as a myocardial infarction
(heart attack). 

EPA and DHA are anti-inflammatory and may favourably modify serum
lipoprotein composition (greater HDL, more larger LDL, less small
dense LDL).  While EPA and DHA can be obtained from the diet, we can
also synthesize them.  The n-6 equivalent of EPA is ARA and has the
opposite functionality regarding inflammation as ARA is
pro-inflammatory.

Arachidonic acid (ARA) is associated with more inflammation in the form of
eicosanoids, and this is associated with a greater risk for CAD.
Humans are unable to synthesize ARA, however delta-6 desaturase and
elongase enzymes are able to create both ARA from LA *and* EPA from ALA.


Study 1:

Role of LC-PUFA on CAD risk. Highlight ethnic differences.
Inflammation (CRP) and cholesterol metabolism (HDL, LDL, VLDL).
Oxidized LDL?

Prospective longitudinal cohort.  Cross-sectional detail on
inflammation and lipoproteins, serum levels of the LC-PUFA.
Prospective data on CAD events. 

Study 1 data (fig/tab): Control vs future CAD and CRP, plasma LC-PUFA,
and lipoprotein composition at the baseline visit.  (Table is showing
that CAD subjects had greater levels of ARA, lower {LA, ALA, EPA},
greater CRP, 

Study 1 data (fig/tab): OR of tertiles of LA, ALA, D6D, and
inflammation as well as CAD risk.

Study 2:

Greater risk alleles for FADS -> greater CRP, CAD risk
Interaction between FADS gene and LC-PUFA intake on cholesterol +
inflammation on CAD.

Possible questions:

Imagine you are clinician and a patient comes in who has has a mixed,
but predominately East African ancestry.  Given that individuals with
African ancestry are more likely to have more alleles of the FADS gene
cluster, given the data and your past knowledge, how could you reduce
their risk for CAD disease?

Final question (?)

Using your previous knowledge: Given a recent clinical trial that
showed no effect of LC-PUFA on myocardial infarction, comment on 1)
some reasons why improvements in lipid metabolisms may not translate
to reductions in heart attack and 2) why a clinical trial may not
always be able to pick up causal mechanisms even if they may be
present in a subset of the population (eg. FADS polymorphism).
